---
layout: post
title: C++14 (Draft)
tags: [ C++ ]
comments : true
categories : defCategory
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

# This post is work in progress.

//C++11 laid the foundations of Modern C++.

## C++14 Language Features
* [auto](#auto)
* move semantics
* variadic templates
* rvalue references

<!--more-->

* initializer lists
* static assertions
* lambda expressions
* decltype
* template aliases
* [nullptr](#nullptr)
* strongly typed enums
* attributes
* constexpr
* delegating constructors
* user-defined literals
* explicit virtual overrides
* final specifier
* default functions
* deleted functions
* range based for loops
* special member functions for move semantics
* converting constructors
* explicit conversion functions
* inline namespaces
* non static data member initializers
* right angle brackets

## C++14 Library Features
* std::move
* std::forward
* std::to_string
* type traits
* smart pointers
* std::chrono
* tuples
* std::tie
* std::array
* unordered containers
* std::make_thread
* memory model


### auto <a href="http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2006/n1984.pdf" target="_blank">(N1984)</a>

```auto``` variables are deduced by the compiler according to the type of initializer using the rules of template argument deduction.
```
auto a = 42; // int
auto b = 3.14; // double
auto c = 'x'; // char
auto& d = a; // int&
auto&& e = a; // int&
auto&& f = 42; //int&& - rvalue refernce
auto e = new auto(42); // int*, auto(42) deduced int.

std::vector<int> v;
auto f = v.begin(); //f is std::vector<int>::iterator
```

```auto``` can also deduce the return type of function. In C++11, there is a limitation that the return type need to be explicitly specified or ```decltype```ed if using ```auto```.
```
template <typename X, typename Y>
auto sum(X a, Y b) -> decltype(a+b) {
  return a+b;
}

auto x = sum(1,2); //int
auto y = sum(3.1,0.04) //double

}
```

C++ inherited ```auto``` keyword from C but was never used. C++11 used the keyword for better.

### nullptr <a href="http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2007/n2431.pdf" target="_blank">(N2431)</a>
```nullptr``` is a pointer literal that reperesent a null pointer value. It is used to represent that a pointer variable does not point to any object/resource.
Since ```nullptr``` is of type ```nullptr_t``` and cannot be converted to integral types, it cleans up the ambiguity of ```0``` and ```NULL```. 
```
void foo(int);
void foo(char*);
foo(NULL);     // error -- ambiguous
foo(nullptr); // calls foo(char*)
```
```nullptr``` is implicitly convertible and comparable to any pointer type or pointer-to-member type.

```nullptr``` is not implicitly convertible or comparable to integral types, except for **bool**.


___sizeof, typeid suppport, dereferncing___

### Right Angle Brackets <a href="http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2005/n1757.html" target="_blank">(N1757)</a>
C++11 is now able to infer when a series of right angle brackets is used as an operator or as a closing right angle bracket for a template. This problem was the consequence of maximum munch principle (also known as longest match), and the fact that >> is a valid token. The problem can also occur with ```>>=``` and ```>=```
Below code snippet was ill-formed Pre-C++11. 
```
typedef std::vector<std::vector<bool>> Flags;   //Pre-C++11, use <bool> >
void func(List<B>= default_val1);  //Pre-C++11, use List<B> = default_val1
void func(List<List<B>>= default_val2);  //Pre-C++11, use List<List<B> > = default_val2
```
