---
layout: post
title:  13 July 1931 - The Great Game Changer
tags : Takri
comments: true
categories: takri
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

## “Neither The People Died Were Martyrs Nor The Maharaja Was Oppressive”.

History has it’s an own importance on the society and regions. As we all know History helps to shape identity and psychology of the society. Jammu Kashmir is the most sensitive and fragile state of the nation. In Jammu Kashmir, we have been facing challenges like Militancy, Border-firing, Unemployment and Natural Disasters on day to day basis. But one of the major challenges is ‘Historical Events’.
<!--more-->

## “The study of any historical event is left trepid without knowing the cause, intent, motives and characters of the participants”. – Pankaj Khajuria.

Therefore, it is very important for us to understand the cause, intent, motives, and characters of any historical event.
13 July 1931, is one of the major historical events of Jammu Kashmir.  It is the landmark day in the history and had a revolutionary effect on the Social-Politica and Economic conditions of Jammu Kashmir. It had completely shattered the Dogras and their identity.  It is the GREAT GAME CHANGER of the Jammu Kashmir history.  This Game had coined the despotic oppressive word for Maharaja Hari Singh Ji and the Cruel for Dogras. On the other hand, Martyred word had been coined for Kashmiris. But if we ‘decode’ the whole historical event by cause, intent, motives and characters, then the things will be different. There are the four major Characters of this Great Game:

- British
- Press
- Kashmiris
- Dogras

In 1925, Maharaja Hari Singh Ji was Crowned as the Maharaja of Jammu Kashmir. Britishers succeeded to appoint the Resident of Kashmir during Maharaja Ranbir Singh Ji time. But now they wanted to interfere into the internal affairs of Jammu Kashmir. On this Maharaja Hari Singh Ji said,” under the treaty had obligations with British crown but it didn’t give any rights to British Residents to interfere into Jammu Kashmir internal affairs”. This Make them angry and insecure. Britisher also wanted to hunt, but Maharaja Hari Singh Ji refused by saying Britishers have no rights to hunt at Jammu Kashmir. All this acted as a fuel in a fire. Maharaja also ordered to fly State Flag at Gilgit and he made it clear by saying that Gilgit is on Lease. However, the British Government of India resented all these moves of the Maharaja that irritated greatly the British Authorities from Delhi to London. Therefore, the political department of the British Government of India was busy drawing up plans for teaching the young Maharaja of Jammu Kashmir, a lesson.

In 1928, Britishers persuaded to Sir Albion Bannerjee, the foreign and political minister of Jammu Kashmir to resign. After resigning he gave an offensive interview at Lahore press. He had announced,” the Jammu Kashmir state is labouring under many disadvantages, with a very large Mohammedan population”. This interview came as a great shock and surprise to everybody.  Because Sir Bannerjee never drew this attention earlier during his ministry. Now Britishers had been using the Divide and Rule policy. The hatred speeches against the Maharaja had started to publish in British India press, the Siyasat, the Pasban and The Muslim outlook. Thus, encouraged by the press and British India Government support, in 1929 Pan Islamic movement of state submitted a joint memorandum to the Maharaja. Maharaja who had already set a Scholarships Selection Board now had constituted a Civil Services Recruitment which had 1/3 for competition,1/3 for promotion and 1/3 for Nomination. And it has reserved 50% for Muslim candidates. 

On 12 Nov 1930 and 15 Jan 1931, in a roundtable conference at London, Maharaja Hari Singh Ji demanded and stood strongly for Independence of motherland, India with an equality of status and a position of honor for his entire Motherland in British Commonwealth of Nations. With this Britishers came to know that Maharaja will not toe their lines like other Princes.  They had already bitter experiences at Delhi and Jammu Kashmir. This time they had given a green signal to GEC Wakefield, the political minister of Jammu Kashmir state to destabilize Maharaja.

Entry of Abdul Qadir: a cook of British Army officer came to Srinagar and he went to extent of inciting the Majority population of Kashmir not to hesitate to use Lathis, stones and brickbats against Maharaja and Dogras. He was arrested under seditious and inflammatory speech.  As the trail was conducting at Court but due to the disturbance of local population District Magistrate had shifted the trail to Central Jail, Srinagar. On 13 July 1931, the trail was supposed to hold at the Central jail with Cameras.  But as the District Magistrate came and saw the people there, he immediately declared an unlawful assembly and ordered its dispersal. But people refused to pay any heed to his order. The mobs started pelting the police force with stones and brickbats. The stone pelting era had started on this very day. When Kashmiris had started to follow the non-Kashmiri. Now District Magistrate issued a warning to the Crowd to disperse. But mob turned violent.  Now Governor gave the orders of firing. The firing line was drawn up to the right of the road from the wooden gate to the iron gate. In first and second round mob did not disperse and continue stone pelting.  Now three more round fires but again they did not disperse. The last three rounds being necessary on the fire 6, 7 and 8 rounds. So far as can be ascertained ten men were killed by the firing at the jail. And now the Sheikh Abdullah had raised and called them Martyrs and Maharaja Hari Singh Ji an Oppressive and Despotic ruler. 

Intent: - As we know the whole real truth and we have found that Britishers were jealous and insecure towards Maharaja and his rule. They wanted to disturb the Jammu Kashmir internal affairs. They used British India press and Platform to build hatred for Hindu Maharaja of Jammu Kashmir.  They used the His ministers. Sheikh had ill will towards Maharaja and got support by British India. He misused the Majority population of State. The people who had died there were not Martyrs because they were not fighting for belonging, they were pelting stones for non-Kashmiris and didn’t let his trial. They were at jail gate for riots and after their death people who supported them had started to loot Kashmiri Pandit houses and set their business on fire. Martyrs never set a trend of looting, raiding and most importantly they never stand with intruders.  

So, if we talk about Maharaja Hari Singh Ji, he was not the cruel, oppressive and despotic ruler. He ordered the Civil service selection board and reserved 50% for the majority population. He set the scholarships programme and reserved amount for the majority population. On the seditious speech of Abdul Qadir, he holds the trail, which has set an example that it was a purely democratic structure. Even after the riots of 13 July 1931, he had ordered for Srinagar Riot enquiry committee-1931 consisted of Chief justice and two judges with 112 witnesses. 

So, by examining the cause, intent, motives and characters of 13 July 1931, it has found neither the died people were martyrs nor the Maharaja was oppressive. It is our duty to keep informing our children about the Real truth of the Great Game Changer.
