---
layout: takriPost
title: Bacch Dua: Where Prakrati Preserves Purasharth 
tags : Takri
comments: true
categories: takri
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Society is a set of people but people are the subset of rituals. It implies that rituals have significant roles in any society. As ritual is a learned process, which performs by the set of people throughout the ages by showing respect and recognition towards common Cause and Effects of it. We celebrate the festivals but we perform the rituals. Rituals help Society to unite and stand at a common cause. Jammu is a Duggar land which is known for many local Folk Festivals, Martial Traditions, and Rituals. There is one of them which is known as the ‘Bacch Dua’. It has its own historical learning importance of having a spiritual story.
<!--more-->

## “This is the prevalence of rituals. To be thankful and remember something that has a Spiritual as well as a Historical importance and cannot be underestimated.” - Pankaj Khajuria

The Historical story of Bacch Dua, has its own relevance and significance for Duggar Land and her people. Bacch Dua has been performing by the Dogras women since the ages. It has been told that once there was a miscommunication between two women of the same family. As one woman had said please cook a ‘Mash’ (Big fish ) but other one hear it as a ‘Bacch’ (little male calf) and she cooked. As soon as when both women came across the fact that miscommunication has caused the death of the calf. They felt sorry and deeply regretted. They assumed the pain of Cow for Bacch. They felt very bad within them because they will be the cause of the Bacch and Cow pain. As we all know being a male child of Cow, Bach always is a dear to Cow. They were helpless. But our Vedas taught if you are intentionally Good then, “Prayer is a Path where there is none.” So they pray to God to return back Bacch life before Cow returns. As both the women were innocent by their intentions and they were caring about the Cow and Bacch relation. Thankfully God grants their wish. So from that day to onwards Dogras women perform the ritual of Bacch Dua. They perform Pooja and Fast for Male children and wish for family well being by remembering the Historical and Spiritual importance of Bacch Dua.
<br>
It has also taught that human beings and nature are inter-dependent to each other. According to the Story, women were so curious about the life of Bacch because of Cow love for her Male Child and also felt the pain of relations irrespective of species. So did they pray for Cow and Bacch relation. In this ritual, women perform Bacch Dua ritual within the water where they also have animals dummy for their well beings and pray for them too. A ritual has its significance in its prayer.
<br>
As Paulo Coelho said, “A prayer couched in the words of the soul, is far more powerful than any rituals.”
<br>
So noble soul of the women, as a feminine power, humbly and selflessly pray for the masculinity. They keep bowing down and thankful to nature to the bottom of the heart by recognizing and respecting the nature. The prayers of a noble soul not only a cause of balance society but also an effective and prosperous society. This is how we can say it has its Spiritual importance where we not only nurture our relationship through rituals, but we nurtured by them rituals; we moved and we are moved.
<br>
 The care and perseverance of masculinity by the feminine power of Dogras women is well read out through its history. We all aware of the fact that  Dogras is a  Martial Race. But much beyond this, It is the only race of India, who have stretched Indian boundaries up to the giant Himalayas, protect India from external threats. It is the only Race which is never ruled by any intruders. And it will not be wrong to say it is all due to the Male (masculine) of the region but the real truth is, it is because of the feminine power who always cares and preserves the masculinity. They are the real strength and powerhouse, Who throughout the ages selflessly and tirelessly devoted for the betterment of the region. Their selfless and tireless prayers and devotion not only empower the male of the family but also strengthen the society. Being a male we pay obeisance to such supreme feminine power, who throughout the ages devoted to the effectiveness and prosperity of male. No one can teach and explain better than Bacch Dua.

