---
layout: takriPost
title:  2+2 : The Challenge and the Posibilities for India
tags : Takri
comments: true
categories: takri
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

On the 10th anniversary of India-USA Civil Nuclear Cooperation, a 2+2 dialogue is going to be held at Delhi on 6 Sep 2018. No doubt, the much-awaited dialogue has its importance for India, where as earlier it was postponed by America. The meeting will be concerned on Geopolitics Strategy, Defence Cooperation and Global Security. From Indian side, it will be represented by foreign minister Smt Sushma Swaraj and Defence Minister Smt Nirmala Sitharaman and their counterparts are State Secretary Mike Pompeo and Defence Secretary Jim Mattis.
<!--more-->

2+2 dialogue has many folds of discussion. It is not as simple as it is looking like. It is already postponed by America. Along with the Geopolitics Strategy, Defence Cooperation and Global Security, it is a going to be proved as a protection and defense of Self Interest for both the nations. On one hand, for both nations, there are many potentials fields and opportunities to explore and grow.  And on the other hand, there are many sectors of confliction and contradiction which restricts self-interest for one nation as part of a strategy for the other one.
<br>
If we talk about confliction and contradiction, on the diplomatic views it has been looking like a negotiation between the trade and control over Asia. Under the Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions ACT (CAATSA), the USA has imposed a restriction on a few countries for America’s security purposes. But India has a very Good relation with few of those countries on historical and trade ground. The USA is well versed about the fact that India-Russia has a long and strong partnership since the Independence. Russia and India Shares Strategic Importance. India is the largest Importer of the Defence logistics and Russia is one of the main and trustworthy suppliers of it. India Purchases S-400 Air Defence system from Russia, which is capable of high altitude and long-range wars. It can prove to be very effective for any future threat from China and Pakistan.
<br>
On the other hand, Iran is the third largest supplier of oil to India. But under the trade war, the USA has set 04 Nov 2018 the deadline to make it Zero. This builds pressure on India. The recent depreciation of Rupee is an Insult to injury. Even Iran has been providing many flexibilities on oil trade, which includes 60 days payment periods and more. In such a situation, it can hurt Indians economically. It is an unfortunate reality that India has been caught in the crossfire of the Trump administration's secondary sanctions against both as Russia and Iran are the restricted nations under CAATSA. And before 2+2 the State Secretary is visiting Pakistan with Army head and both nations historical relations is well known by the world. America understands the Pakistan’s strategic importance for her in Taliban and Russian control.
<br>
But beyond this Diplomatic and Asia control deal, this 2+2 dialogue will have a unique and Immense potential of Growth. This relationship lies in how the world biggest economy, as well as the oldest democracy and fast-growing economy as well as the biggest democracy, can work together to desired growth. The desired growth can be sustained only through strong economic and trade ties. For the last two decades, the goods and services trade between the two countries has grown by over 900%. The trade has raised from $11.2 billion in 1995 to $115 billion in 2016. FDI increased in India $30 billion and in the USA $10 billion. There are many companies which are operating very well in India and there are many Indian companies which are looking to explore the American possibilities. Infosys has already announced 10K recruitment from the USA. It will not be wrong if we take it as an ‘American First’ approach.
<br>
So, it is far more challengeable for India, it is all about to defend the historical and strategical dealing for self Interest as well as to explore the expanding possibilities. It is an indication of the deepening strategic partnership between our two countries, and India's emergence as a net security provider in the region. But the main challenge will remain to maintain the balance and explore the possibilities.
