---
layout: post
title: God 
tags: [ Thoughts ]
comments : true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

God is Omnipresent.<br/>
God is Eternal.<br/>
God is Omnipotent.<br/>
God is Immense.<br/>
God is the Creator and the Destructor.

<!--more-->

Very obviously. This list will never end.

Except for a few atheists, everyone will agree that nothing exists in this universe that is beyond God.

But being a computer science and mathematics student, always felt a need for a complete mathematical, logical and unambiguous definition of God. The definition being taught by society doesn’t seem to be accepted by the logical Turing Machine.

Study of the dimensions gave me a definition of God that can be treated mathematically in the form of equations.

We live in a beautiful world. Every object we see is perceived as a three-dimensional object. But are we sure that it’s actually a 3-dimensional world? Well, I don’t think so.

Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions (a short novel) can take you to a world where you can’t jump, you don’t have a food-pipe. In fact everything there is two dimensional. The only allowed movements there are left right, forward, backward. But we are God for them. We can look at their whole world at a time. We can lift there world. We can remove money from there safes without opening. This is all because the flatlanders being 2-dimensional creatures can see and visualize only 2-dimensional objects. They can only see a shadow-like structure of us that too in their two-dimensional world.

So there exists an infinite number of two-dimensional worlds in a 3d world.

Copying the analogy to our world we can think of 4d creatures that can see the whole earth at a time. And we can only see the 3-d shadow of the supernatural 4d. Visualization of 4d will give you supernatural powers we always want to. Invisibility, time travel, passing through walls..everything is possible there...

So an nth dimensional creature would have supernatural powers in (n-1)th dimensional world.

Using the principle of mathematical induction..we can have an infinite-dimensional being who can control, construct, destruct all other dimensions and worlds unvisualized by all other dimensions. The ∞-dimensional being is no one but God. The dimensions let Him be omnipresent, supernatural, unrealizable, shapeless and the rest you can get from any priest.

I’ve heard that understanding God is to understand yourself. God lies within you. God is above all. And God may be definitionless because God may be dimensionless.

May God bless you all.
