---
layout: post
title: C++11 (Draft..)
tags: [ C++ ]
comments : true
excerpt_separator : <!--more-->
---

# This post is work in progress.

C++11 laid the foundations of Modern C++.

## C++11 Language Features
- [auto](#auto-(N1984))
- [move semantics](#move-semantics)
- [rvalue references](#rvalue-references)
- variadic templates <!--more-->
- initializer lists
- [static assertions](#static-assertions)
- lambda expressions
- decltype
- template aliases
- [nullptr](#nullptr)
- [strongly typed enums](#Strongly-Typed-Enums)
- attributes
- constexpr
- delegating constructors
- user-defined literals
- explicit virtual overrides
- final specifier
- default functions
- deleted functions
- range based for loops
- special member functions for move semantics
- converting constructors
- explicit conversion functions
- inline namespaces
- non static data member initializers
- [right angle brackets](#right-angle-brackets)

## C++11 Library Features
* std::move
* std::forward
* std::to_string
* type traits
* smart pointers
* std::chrono
* tuples
* std::tie
* std::array
* unordered containers
* std::make_thread
* memory model


### auto <a href="http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2006/n1984.pdf" target="_blank">(N1984)</a>
```auto``` variables are deduced by the compiler according to the type of initializer using the rules of template argument deduction.
```
auto a = 42; // int
auto b = 3.14; // double
auto c = 'x'; // char
auto& d = a; // int&
auto&& e = a; // int&
auto&& f = 42; //int&& - rvalue refernce
auto e = new auto(42); // int*, auto(42) deduced int.

std::vector<int> v;
auto f = v.begin(); //f is std::vector<int>::iterator
```

```auto``` can also deduce the return type of function. In C++11, there is a limitation that the return type need to be explicitly specified or ```decltype```ed if using ```auto```.
```
template <typename X, typename Y>
auto sum(X a, Y b) -> decltype(a+b) {
  return a+b;
}

auto x = sum(1,2); //int
auto y = sum(3.1,0.04) //double

}
```

C++ inherited ```auto``` keyword from C but was never used. C++11 used the keyword for better.

### move semantics <a href="http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2002/n1377.htm" target="_blank">(N1377)</a>
move semantics is the ability to move an expensive object from one memory location to another, while taking out the guts of the source in order to construct the target with minimum expense. It is different from copy, as copy leaves the source unchanged. Whereas a move can leave the source unchanged or changed. Choosing move over copy means that you don't care what happens to the state of source.

To move an objects means to transfer ownership of some resource it manages to other object just like shallow copying. Such inexpensive transfer of resources is extremely useful when the source is an ```rvalue```, because the potential side-effects of changing the source after move is not dangerous as the temporary object won't be accesible later.

```
class MyString {
    char *data;
  
  public:
    MyString(const char *p) { //Default constructor
      size_t size = strlen(p)+1;
      data = new char[size];
       memcpy(data, p, size);
     }
    MyString(const MyString& obj) { //Copy Constructor
      size_t size = strlen(p)+1;
      data = new char[size];
      memcpy(data, obj.data, size);
    }  
};
```
C++11 introduced the move constructor and move assignment to faclitate move semantics. Below is the in-expensive move constructor.
```
  MyString( MyString& obj) {
    data = obj.data;
     obj.data = nullptr;
   }
```
The move constructor is called whenever the object is created from an r-value. For example,
```
  MyString x(y+z);
  MyString y(func_returing_MyString());
```
For plain old data, a move is same as copy.

### rvalue references <a href="http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2004/n1690.html" target="_blank">(N1690)</a>
C++11 introduced rvalue references that can bind to both lvalues and rvalues, even if they are not const qualified. Earlier, rvalues can only bind to const lvalue referneces. 

They are created with the syntax ```&&```.  And functions can be overloaded on ```A&``` and ```A&&```. For example,
```
void foo( A& x);  #1 
void foo( A&& x); #2
```
Reference collapsing rules are used for overload resolution:<br/>
A&  &  --> A&
<br/>A&  && --> A&
<br/>A&& &  --> A&
<br/>A&& && --> A&&

For overload resolution, lvalues prefer lvalue references. rvalues prefer rvalue references. 
lvalues can bind to rvalue references, but prefer an lvalue reference.
rvalues can still bind to const lvalue refernce (const A&), but only if there isn't a more attractive rvalue reference in the overload set.

```
int x = 0;
int&  xl = x;   // x is an lvalue reference
int&& xr = x;   // Compiler Error - lvalues can only bind to lvalue references.
int&& xr = 0;
```

rvalues are introduced to enable two major features : 
1. move semanitcs: by facilitating move constructor/assignment by rvalue overload.
2. perfect forwarding: the ability to pass arguments while maintaining information about them as lvalues/rvalues.

### nullptr <a href="http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2007/n2431.pdf" target="_blank">(N2431)</a>
```nullptr``` is a pointer literal that reperesent a null pointer value. It is used to represent that a pointer variable does not point to any object/resource.
Since ```nullptr``` is of type ```nullptr_t``` and cannot be converted to integral types, it cleans up the ambiguity of ```0``` and ```NULL```. 
```
void foo(int);
void foo(char*);
foo(NULL);     // error -- ambiguous
foo(nullptr); // calls foo(char*)
```
```nullptr``` is implicitly convertible and comparable to any pointer type or pointer-to-member type.

```nullptr``` is not implicitly convertible or comparable to integral types, except for **bool**.


___sizeof, typeid suppport, dereferncing___

### Right Angle Brackets <a href="http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2005/n1757.html" target="_blank">(N1757)</a>
C++11 is now able to infer when a series of right angle brackets is used as an operator or as a closing right angle bracket for a template. This problem was the consequence of maximum munch principle (also known as longest match), and the fact that >> is a valid token. The problem can also occur with ```>>=``` and ```>=```
Below code snippet was ill-formed Pre-C++11. 
```
typedef std::vector<std::vector<bool>> Flags;   //Pre-C++11, use <bool> >
void func(List<B>= default_val1);  //Pre-C++11, use List<B> = default_val1
void func(List<List<B>>= default_val2);  //Pre-C++11, use List<List<B> > = default_val2
```

### Strongly Typed Enums <a href="http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2007/n2347.pdf" target="_blank">(N2347)</a>
Type safe enums solves the problems of implicit conversion to integer, inability to specify underlying type and exporting of enumerators in the enclosing scope.
Type safe enums are strongly typed. The enumerators are in the scope of enum and not exported to higher scope. The underlying type is also well defined for modern type safe enums. The default underlying type is still int. However the underlying type can now be specified therby deterministically specifying the space requirement for the reperesentation of an enum variable.
```
enum class Color : uint8_t {
	Red,
	Green,
	Blue,
};
One c1 = Red; //Error, as Red is not in enclosing scope.
One c1 = Color::Red; //correct
```
Existing enums are extended to allow underlying type and explicit scoping. The names of enumerators are in the enum’s scope, and they are also injected into the enclosing scope. It preserves backward compatibility so that the meaning of existing programs is unchanged. it also enables programmers to write enum-agnostic code on both type of enums.


### Static Assert <a href="http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2004/n1720.html" target="_blank">(N1720)</a>
```static_assert``` is evaluated at compile time. This was introduced as the existing ```assert``` macro is not appropriate for use in template libraries.
```
static_assert(sizeof(long) >= 8, "64-bit code generation not enabled/supported.");

template <class CharT, class Traits = std::char_traits<CharT> >
class basic_string {
        static_assert(tr1::is_pod<CharT>::value,
                      "Template argument CharT must be a POD type in class template basic_string");
        // ...
};
```
